README.md, before:

# blog.jakubholy.net

## TODO

- Old WP posts
  - enable excerpts (here html x new plaintext)
  - Merge / remove some categories such as J2EE, DB2
  - FIXME handle `[gist https://gist.github.com/3683899 /]\` or gist at the end of the input if preceeded by a new line
- Old WP pages
  - Heroes: in .md, img of Hamilton gets lost
  - export them to .md, check, put under content/pages/, preserve nesting
  - have them under / not `/pages` so that old intra links will work
  - fix intrablog links in wiki, eg from http://me:8000/pages/wiki/,
    http://me:8000/pages/best/
  - Menu: Display only top-level pages and one for each dir with links
    to pages
  - review the migrated content
- Add tag cloud
- Test in Firefox
- Menu: Re-enable search and contact (see commits 0eb0dde, 66da8f1) after configuring their backends
- Look & feel:
   - re-enable support for cover images (commented out; need to pass remark its plugins in `gatsby-node`; perhaps move the code into a local plugin first)
   - don't show the author info at / (based on frontmatter's `author: name`)
   - don't show author info the end of each post
   - desktop: show top pages, tag cloud, ...

---

# Original README

A [GatsbyJS](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/) blog starter. <br /><br />

[![GitHub tag](https://img.shields.io/github/tag/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.svg)](https://github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-personal-blog)
[![GitHub stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.svg)](https://github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-personal-blog/stargazers)
[![GitHub license](https://img.shields.io/github/license/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.svg)](https://github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-personal-blog/blob/master/LICENSE)
[![code style: prettier](https://img.shields.io/badge/code_style-prettier-ff69b4.svg?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/prettier/prettier)
![GitHub contributors](https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.svg)
[![PRs Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](http://makeapullrequest.com)
[![Twitter](https://img.shields.io/twitter/url/https/github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.svg?style=social)](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wow:&url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fgreglobinski%2Fgatsby-starter-hero-blog)

  <br />

![](static/screens/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.gif) <br />

  <br />

See the starter in action » [demo website](https://gatsby-starter-hero-blog.greglobinski.com/) <br />For more information visit » [dev.greglobinski.com/gatsby-starter-hero-blog](https://dev.greglobinski.com/gatsby-starter-hero-blog/)

## Description

A ready to use, easy to customize 'like theme' starter with a 'Hero' section on the home page.

The starter was initially built for Gatsby v1. Now, thanks to [@mohsenkhanpour](https://github.com/mohsenkhanpour) it's [upgraded](https://github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog/issues/32) to Gatsby v2. Thank you Mohsen :)

The original version of the starter is preserved as the branch `gatsby-v1`.

## Features:

- Easy editable content in **Markdown** files (posts, pages and parts)
- **CSS** with `styled-jsx` and `PostCSS`
- **SEO** (sitemap generation, robot.txt, meta and OpenGraph Tags)
- **Social** sharing (Twitter, Facebook, Google, LinkedIn)
- **Comments** (Facebook)
- **Images** lazy loading and `webp` support (gatsby-image)
- Post **categories** (category based post list)
- Full text **searching** (Algolia)
- **Contact** form (Netlify form handling)
- Form elements and validation with `ant-design`
- **RSS** feed
- 100% **PWA** (manifest.webmanifest, offline support, favicons)
- Google **Analytics**
- App **favicons** generator (node script)
- Easy customizable base **styles** via `theme` object generated from `yaml` file (fonts, colors, sizes)
- React **v.16.3** (gatsby-plugin-react-next)
- **Components** lazy loading (social sharing)
- **ESLint** (google config)
- **Prettier** code styling
- Webpack `BundleAnalyzerPlugin`
- **Gravatar** image (optional) instead local Avatar/Logo image

## Prerequisites

If you do not have Gatsby Cli installed yet, do it first.

```text
npm install --global gatsby-cli
```

More information on [GatsbyJS.org](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/part-one)

## Getting started

Install the starter using Gatsby Cli `gatsby new` command.

```text
gatsby new [NEW_SITE_DIRECTORY_FOR_YOUR_BLOG] https://github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.git
```

Go into the newly created directory and run

```text
gatsby develop
```

to hot-serve your website on http://localhost:8000 or

```text
gatsby build
```

to create static site ready to host (/public).

##### External services

The starter uses external services for some functions: comments, searching, analytics. To use them you have to secure some access data. All services are free to use or have generous free tiers big enough for a personal blog.

Create an `.env` file like below in the root folder. Change `...` placeholders with real data.
<br />By default, your `.env` file will be ignored by git. Remove `.env` from `.gitignore` in order to be able to push the file to your repository.

```text
GOOGLE_ANALYTICS_ID=...
ALGOLIA_APP_ID=...
ALGOLIA_SEARCH_ONLY_API_KEY=...
ALGOLIA_ADMIN_API_KEY=...
ALGOLIA_INDEX_NAME=...
FB_APP_ID=...
```

### Instructions & tutorials

- [How to install, setup and add new content to a Blog starter](https://dev.greglobinski.com/install-blog-starter/)
- [Setup Algolia account for your GatsbyJS blog](https://dev.greglobinski.com/setup-algolia-account/)
- More articles at [Front-end web development with Greg](https://dev.greglobinski.com/)

## Windows users

You should take a look at this: [Gatsby on Windows](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/gatsby-on-windows/)

## Authors

- Greg Lobinski [@greglobinski](https://github.com/greglobinski)

See also the list of [contributors](https://github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-personal-blog/graphs/contributors) who participated in this project.

## Contributing

- Fork the repo
- Create your feature branch (git checkout -b feature/fooBar)
- Commit your changes (git commit -am 'Add some fooBar')
- Push to the branch (git push origin feature/fooBar)
- Create a new Pull Request

## Licence

MIT License

Copyright (c) 2017 gatsbyjs <br />Copyright (c) 2018 greg lobinski

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

Commit message:

TMP: /posts, /pages => diff of current / old blog
(side by side display in iframes)

README.md, after:

# blog.jakubholy.net

## TODO

- The <main>'s top is hidden behind the <header> on some pages such as 404 => add margin-top: 80px or something
- Old WP posts
  - enable excerpts (here html x new plaintext)
  - Merge / remove some categories such as J2EE, DB2
  - FIXME handle `[gist https://gist.github.com/3683899 /]\` or gist at the end of the input if preceeded by a new line
- Old WP pages
  - Heroes: in .md, img of Hamilton gets lost
  - export them to .md, check, put under content/pages/, preserve nesting
  - have them under / not `/pages` so that old intra links will work
  - fix intrablog links in wiki, eg from http://me:8000/pages/wiki/,
    http://me:8000/pages/best/
  - Menu: Display only top-level pages and one for each dir with links
    to pages
  - review the migrated content
- Add tag cloud
- Test in Firefox
- Menu: Re-enable search and contact (see commits 0eb0dde, 66da8f1) after configuring their backends
- Look & feel:
   - re-enable support for cover images (commented out; need to pass remark its plugins in `gatsby-node`; perhaps move the code into a local plugin first)
   - don't show the author info at / (based on frontmatter's `author: name`)
   - don't show author info the end of each post
   - desktop: show top pages, tag cloud, ...

---

# Original README

A [GatsbyJS](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/) blog starter. <br /><br />

[![GitHub tag](https://img.shields.io/github/tag/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.svg)](https://github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-personal-blog)
[![GitHub stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.svg)](https://github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-personal-blog/stargazers)
[![GitHub license](https://img.shields.io/github/license/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.svg)](https://github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-personal-blog/blob/master/LICENSE)
[![code style: prettier](https://img.shields.io/badge/code_style-prettier-ff69b4.svg?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/prettier/prettier)
![GitHub contributors](https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.svg)
[![PRs Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](http://makeapullrequest.com)
[![Twitter](https://img.shields.io/twitter/url/https/github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.svg?style=social)](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wow:&url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fgreglobinski%2Fgatsby-starter-hero-blog)

  <br />

![](static/screens/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.gif) <br />

  <br />

See the starter in action » [demo website](https://gatsby-starter-hero-blog.greglobinski.com/) <br />For more information visit » [dev.greglobinski.com/gatsby-starter-hero-blog](https://dev.greglobinski.com/gatsby-starter-hero-blog/)

## Description

A ready to use, easy to customize 'like theme' starter with a 'Hero' section on the home page.

The starter was initially built for Gatsby v1. Now, thanks to [@mohsenkhanpour](https://github.com/mohsenkhanpour) it's [upgraded](https://github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog/issues/32) to Gatsby v2. Thank you Mohsen :)

The original version of the starter is preserved as the branch `gatsby-v1`.

## Features:

- Easy editable content in **Markdown** files (posts, pages and parts)
- **CSS** with `styled-jsx` and `PostCSS`
- **SEO** (sitemap generation, robot.txt, meta and OpenGraph Tags)
- **Social** sharing (Twitter, Facebook, Google, LinkedIn)
- **Comments** (Facebook)
- **Images** lazy loading and `webp` support (gatsby-image)
- Post **categories** (category based post list)
- Full text **searching** (Algolia)
- **Contact** form (Netlify form handling)
- Form elements and validation with `ant-design`
- **RSS** feed
- 100% **PWA** (manifest.webmanifest, offline support, favicons)
- Google **Analytics**
- App **favicons** generator (node script)
- Easy customizable base **styles** via `theme` object generated from `yaml` file (fonts, colors, sizes)
- React **v.16.3** (gatsby-plugin-react-next)
- **Components** lazy loading (social sharing)
- **ESLint** (google config)
- **Prettier** code styling
- Webpack `BundleAnalyzerPlugin`
- **Gravatar** image (optional) instead local Avatar/Logo image

## Prerequisites

If you do not have Gatsby Cli installed yet, do it first.

```text
npm install --global gatsby-cli
```

More information on [GatsbyJS.org](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/part-one)

## Getting started

Install the starter using Gatsby Cli `gatsby new` command.

```text
gatsby new [NEW_SITE_DIRECTORY_FOR_YOUR_BLOG] https://github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-hero-blog.git
```

Go into the newly created directory and run

```text
gatsby develop
```

to hot-serve your website on http://localhost:8000 or

```text
gatsby build
```

to create static site ready to host (/public).

##### External services

The starter uses external services for some functions: comments, searching, analytics. To use them you have to secure some access data. All services are free to use or have generous free tiers big enough for a personal blog.

Create an `.env` file like below in the root folder. Change `...` placeholders with real data.
<br />By default, your `.env` file will be ignored by git. Remove `.env` from `.gitignore` in order to be able to push the file to your repository.

```text
GOOGLE_ANALYTICS_ID=...
ALGOLIA_APP_ID=...
ALGOLIA_SEARCH_ONLY_API_KEY=...
ALGOLIA_ADMIN_API_KEY=...
ALGOLIA_INDEX_NAME=...
FB_APP_ID=...
```

### Instructions & tutorials

- [How to install, setup and add new content to a Blog starter](https://dev.greglobinski.com/install-blog-starter/)
- [Setup Algolia account for your GatsbyJS blog](https://dev.greglobinski.com/setup-algolia-account/)
- More articles at [Front-end web development with Greg](https://dev.greglobinski.com/)

## Windows users

You should take a look at this: [Gatsby on Windows](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/gatsby-on-windows/)

## Authors

- Greg Lobinski [@greglobinski](https://github.com/greglobinski)

See also the list of [contributors](https://github.com/greglobinski/gatsby-starter-personal-blog/graphs/contributors) who participated in this project.

## Contributing

- Fork the repo
- Create your feature branch (git checkout -b feature/fooBar)
- Commit your changes (git commit -am 'Add some fooBar')
- Push to the branch (git push origin feature/fooBar)
- Create a new Pull Request

## Licence

MIT License

Copyright (c) 2017 gatsbyjs <br />Copyright (c) 2018 greg lobinski

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
